.TH RUSTNMAP 1 "February 2026" "RustNmap 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rustnmap \- Rust Network Mapper - A high-performance network scanning tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rustnmap
[\fIscan type(s)\fR] [\fIoptions\fR] {\fItarget specification\fR}
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B RustNmap
is a modern, high-performance network scanning tool written in Rust,
designed to provide 100% functional parity with Nmap while leveraging
Rust's safety guarantees and asynchronous capabilities for improved
performance.
.PP
It can be used to:
.RS
- Discover hosts on a network
- Identify open ports on target systems
- Detect services and their versions
- Determine operating systems
- Execute Lua scripts for advanced detection
- Map networks and audit security
.RE
.SH SCAN TYPES
.TP
.B \-sS
TCP SYN scan (default, requires root). Half-open scanning that does not
complete the TCP handshake.
.TP
.B \-sT
TCP Connect scan. Uses full TCP connection, does not require root.
.TP
.B \-sU
UDP scan. Scans for UDP services, often slower than TCP scans.
.TP
.B \-sF
FIN scan. Sends FIN packets to bypass simple firewalls.
.TP
.B \-sN
NULL scan. No flags set in TCP header.
.TP
.B \-sX
XMAS scan. Sets FIN, PSH, and URG flags.
.TP
.B \-sA
ACK scan. Used for firewall rule mapping.
.TP
.B \-sW
Window scan. Similar to ACK but uses window size to determine port state.
.TP
.B \-sM
Maimon scan. Sends FIN/ACK probes.
.TP
.B \-sI <zombie>
Idle scan. Uses a zombie host to perform stealthy scanning.
.TP
.B \-b <ftp_relay>
FTP bounce scan. Uses FTP server as a proxy.
.TP
.B \-sY
SCTP INIT scan. Scans SCTP services.
.TP
.B \-sO
IP protocol scan. Scans for supported IP protocols.
.SH HOST DISCOVERY
.TP
.B \-sL
List scan. Lists targets without scanning.
.TP
.B \-sn
Ping scan. Disables port scanning, only host discovery.
.TP
.B \-Pn
Treat all hosts as online. Skip host discovery.
.TP
.B \-PS<portlist>
TCP SYN discovery. Sends SYN to specified ports.
.TP
.B \-PA<portlist>
TCP ACK discovery. Sends ACK to specified ports.
.TP
.B \-PU<portlist>
UDP discovery. Sends UDP packets to specified ports.
.TP
.B \-PE
ICMP echo request discovery (standard ping).
.TP
.B \-PP
ICMP timestamp request discovery.
.TP
.B \-PM
ICMP netmask request discovery.
.TP
.B \-PR
ARP ping discovery. Uses ARP for local network.
.TP
.B \-PY<portlist>
SCTP INIT discovery.
.SH PORT SPECIFICATION
.TP
.B \-p <port ranges>
Scan specified ports. Examples: 22, 1-65535, U:53, T:80.
.TP
.B \-F
Fast scan. Scan top 100 common ports.
.TP
.B \-r
Scan ports consecutively. Don't randomize.
.TP
.B \-\-top\-ports <n>
Scan n most common ports.
.TP
.B \-\-port\-ratio <ratio>
Scan ports more common than ratio (0.0-1.0).
.SH SERVICE/VERSION DETECTION
.TP
.B \-sV
Probe open ports to determine service/version info.
.TP
.B \-\-version\-intensity <0-9>
Set version scan intensity. 0 is light, 9 is all probes.
.TP
.B \-\-version\-light
Limit to most likely probes (intensity 2).
.TP
.B \-\-version\-all
Try every single probe (intensity 9).
.TP
.B \-\-version\-trace
Show detailed version scan activity.
.SH OS DETECTION
.TP
.B \-O
Enable OS detection.
.TP
.B \-\-osscan\-limit
Limit OS detection to promising targets.
.TP
.B \-\-osscan\-guess
Guess OS more aggressively.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-os\-tries <n>
Set maximum number of OS detection tries.
.SH TIMING AND PERFORMANCE
.TP
.B \-T<0-5>
Set timing template. Higher is faster.
.RS
- T0: Paranoid (very slow, evasive)
- T1: Sneaky (slow, evasive)
- T2: Polite (slow)
- T3: Normal (default)
- T4: Aggressive (fast)
- T5: Insane (very fast)
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-min\-hostgroup <n>
Parallel host scan group sizes.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-hostgroup <n>
Maximum parallel host scan group sizes.
.TP
.B \-\-min\-parallelism <n>
Probe parallelization minimum.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-parallelism <n>
Probe parallelization maximum.
.TP
.B \-\-min\-rtt\-timeout <time>
Specifies probe round trip time minimum.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-rtt\-timeout <time>
Specifies probe round trip time maximum.
.TP
.B \-\-initial\-rtt\-timeout <time>
Specifies initial probe round trip time.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-retries <tries>
Caps number of port scan probe retransmissions.
.TP
.B \-\-host\-timeout <time>
Give up on target after this long.
.TP
.B \-\-scan\-delay <time>
Adjust delay between probes.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-scan\-delay <time>
Adjust maximum delay between probes.
.TP
.B \-\-min\-rate <number>
Send packets no slower than <number> per second.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-rate <number>
Send packets no faster than <number> per second.
.SH FIREWALL/IDS EVASION
.TP
.B \-f
Fragment packets. Use 8-byte fragments.
.TP
.B \-\-mtu <value>
Fragment packets with specified MTU.
.TP
.B \-D <decoy1,decoy2,...>
Cloak scan with decoys. Use ME for real IP.
.TP
.B \-S <IP_Address>
Spoof source address.
.TP
.B \-g <portnum>
Use given source port number.
.TP
.B \-\-data\-length <num>
Append random data to sent packets.
.TP
.B \-\-data\-string <string>
Append custom string to sent packets.
.TP
.B \-\-data\-hex <hex>
Append hex string to sent packets.
.TP
.B \-\-spoof\-mac <mac>
Spoof MAC address. 0 for random.
.SH OUTPUT OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-oN <file>
Output scan in normal format.
.TP
.B \-oX <file>
Output scan in XML format.
.TP
.B \-oJ <file>
Output scan in JSON format.
.TP
.B \-oG <file>
Output scan in grepable format.
.TP
.B \-oS <file>
Output scan in script kiddie format.
.TP
.B \-oA <basename>
Output in all formats (normal, XML, JSON, grepable).
.TP
.B \-v
Increase verbosity level.
.TP
.B \-vv
More verbose.
.TP
.B \-d
Increase debugging level.
.TP
.B \-dd
More debugging.
.TP
.B \-\-reason
Display reason for port state.
.TP
.B \-\-open
Only show open (or possibly open) ports.
.TP
.B \-\-packet\-trace
Show all packets sent and received.
.TP
.B \-\-append\-output
Append to rather than clobber output files.
.TP
.B \-\-resume <file>
Resume aborted scan from file.
.SH NSE SCRIPTING
.TP
.B \-sC
Perform script scan using default safe set.
.TP
.B \-\-script <script>
Run specified scripts. Comma-separated list.
.TP
.B \-\-script\-args <args>
Provide arguments to scripts.
.TP
.B \-\-script\-args\-file <file>
Provide arguments from file.
.TP
.B \-\-script\-trace
Show all data sent and received.
.TP
.B \-\-script\-help <script>
Show help about scripts.
.SH TARGET SPECIFICATION
Can be passed as arguments or from file:
.TP
.B \-iL <inputfile>
Input from list of hosts/networks.
.TP
.B \-iR <num hosts>
Choose random targets.
.TP
.B \-\-exclude <host1,...>
Exclude hosts/networks.
.TP
.B \-\-excludefile <exclude_file>
Exclude list from file.
.PP
Target formats:
.RS
- Single IP: 192.168.1.1
- Multiple: 192.168.1.1 192.168.1.2
- CIDR: 192.168.1.0/24
- Range: 192.168.1.1-100
- Hostname: example.com
- IPv6: 2001:db8::1
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B rustnmap 192.168.1.1
Default scan of single target.
.TP
.B rustnmap -sS 192.168.1.0/24
SYN scan of network.
.TP
.B rustnmap -sV -p 22,80,443 192.168.1.1
Service detection on specific ports.
.TP
.B rustnmap -A 192.168.1.1
Aggressive scan (OS, version, scripts, traceroute).
.TP
.B rustnmap -sS -T4 -oA scan-results 192.168.1.0/24
Fast SYN scan with all output formats.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Scan completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Error during scan.
.TP
.B 2
At least one port was found open.
.TP
.B 3
No ports found open.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/rustnmap/nmap-service-probes
Service probe database.
.TP
.I /usr/share/rustnmap/nmap-os-db
OS fingerprint database.
.TP
.I /usr/share/rustnmap/nmap-mac-prefixes
MAC vendor database.
.TP
.I /usr/share/rustnmap/scripts/
NSE script directory.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUSTNMAP_DEBUG
Set to enable debug output.
.TP
.B TEST_TARGET_IP
Target IP for integration tests.
.SH NOTES
RustNmap requires root privileges for raw socket operations including:
.RS
- SYN, FIN, NULL, XMAS, ACK scans
- UDP scans
- OS detection
- Most host discovery methods
.RE
.PP
TCP Connect scans (-sT) and some other operations can run without root.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/greatwallisme/rust-nmap/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Written by the RustNmap project contributors.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 2026 RustNmap Project.
Licensed under the MIT License.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nmap (1),
.BR tcpdump (8),
.BR wireshark (1)
.PP
Full documentation available at:
https://github.com/greatwallisme/rust-nmap/blob/main/doc/user-guide.md
